---
layout: post
title:  "Ethics"
---

- What are your organization’s ethics, principles, and values, which will be important to this project? How will you apply those principles to working with data in this project?
- How do you align your organisational policies to this project? Do they directly apply or might you need to update the policies to ensure they helpfully apply to your data driven project? For example, how will you address privacy, consent, participation, stakeholder consultation etc.
- Who could potentially be adversely affected by data use in your project, and how?
- How will you address issues related to consent and/or external stakeholder consultation?
- What ethical obligations do you have to other stakeholders (i.e. people other than the data subjects) and how will you meet them?
- What would happen if the project would need to be stopped? How would you deal with the data and with communication with the data subjects. Who is responsible for ‘pressing stop’ on these projects.   What is the chain of command?
- Who are the populations at risk and what makes them vulnerable? What information and expertise do you need to under the vulnerability?
- Who in the project/organisation will have oversight of this data use? Who is accountable for ensuring that it is used for the purposes for which it was collected and in a manner that supports the intended outcomes?

##What Next:

- Develop an ethics/responsibility plan for the project and a monitoring plan for assuring compliance.
- Develop a data security plan and "Red Buttons" checklist for dealing with breaches, including circumstances for suspending/ending program.
- Develop a communications plan to communicate both plans across all team members and assign responsibilities accordingly.
